You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWN.org.
Today's message comes from senior pastor, Dr. Bob McCartney.
Let's open our Bibles this morning to Matthew chapter 6 verse 19.
We've been walking through a series of messages about walking into the valley and sometimes
There are different kinds of valleys this morning.
We're going to talk about the valley of financial problems or financial distress.
And so we're going to talk about when the bank account is empty.
And we need to explore that.
We need to understand some things about walking through this kind of valley.
Since 1967, the publishers clearing house sweepstakes had sort of become a part of a American culture.
Typically on Super Bowl Sunday, the folks from Publishers Clearing House, which was a magazine sales sort of company, they would show up at someone's house, knock on the door, big bouquets of helium balloons and a big oversized check to tell them they had won a considerable sum of money, maybe perhaps hundreds of thousands or later millions of dollars that they would be given through this sweepstakes.
Well, about 15 years ago, they changed how they did that.
And they changed it to a lump sum to $5,000 a week for the rest of your life.
And that sounded pretty good.
That's $260,000 a year.
But however old you were, you got $5,000 a week for the rest of your life.
And that was great until this past January when publishers clearing house declared bankruptcy and
They had no money to pay out the for the rest of your life sums that were supposed to be given to people.
John Wiley, who is 61 years old, says that he won the sweepstakes when he was 51, 10 years ago.
And now he's unemployed, he's looking for a job at 61.
Very few people want to hire him.
He says, quote, this feels like a nightmare.
I thought I was going to go on for the rest of my life.
So I didn't really have to worry about money at all.
Here's the facts.
The facts are that all of us are going to go through a period of financial distress.
And whether you won the sweepstakes or not, all of us are going to walk into a financial valley.
Now,
There are a couple of things that I want to talk about this morning before we dig into the text.
First of all, there are some of you who think I am way too young for this message.
I don't have to worry about this.
Mom and Dad, take care of the bills.
I want to give you some principles this morning, especially those of you who are junior high, high school and college students.
If you will start implementing these simple principles in your life, it will be a lot better for you.
The longer you go without doing some of the things I want to show you from the Bible that God tells us to do financially, the harder your life will get.
But for all the rest of you, I'm just going to tell you this.
We live in a culture of TMI, too much information.
I know too much.
You know too much.
I know too much about where you went on vacation, and you know too much about where I went.
I know too much about the new car or the new truck you got.
I know too much about my neighbor's remodeling project.
We just know way too much about everybody else, and we have this competitive spirit.
There is this desire in our flesh to keep up.
We got to have what everybody else gets.
In my hobby, when one of my friends in cycling or triathlon gets a new bike, I really need one.
I really, really need one.
It's not sort of like there's this joke that says if your wife is angry, go buy a new bike.
She's not going to be less angry, but you'll have a new bike.
Well, we live in a culture that says you've got to keep up.
And because of that, we find ourselves sometimes really struggling financially.
There is a passage of Scripture in which Jesus is going to speak directly to us.
He's going to speak directly into this valley of financial distress.
And we want to talk about that this morning.
It's in the Sermon on the Mount, the greatest sermon ever preached.
Jesus talked about a number of things, but he talked about our relationship, the relationship between God and money and where we have to prioritize that.
So let's look at verse 19 of Matthew chapter six.
And I'm going to point out some verses for you.
First of all, verse 19, do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth where moth and rust destroy where thieves break in and steal, but store up for yourselves treasures in heaven where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal.
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Skip down to verse 24.
No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to one and despise the other.
You cannot serve God and will.
For this reason I say to you,
do not be worried about your life as to what you will eat or what you will drink nor for your body as to what you will put on is life not more than food and the body more than clothing.
Look at the birds of the sky and they do not sow nor reap nor gather into barns and yet your heavenly Father feeds them.
Are you not much more important than they?
And which of you by worrying can add a single
a single day to his life span.
And why are you worried about clothing?
Notice how the lilies of the field grow.
They don't labor and they don't spend bread for cloth.
Yet I say to you that not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed himself like one of these.
But if God so closed the grass of the field, which is alive today and tomorrow is thrown into a furnace, will he not much more clothe you?
You of little faith.
do not worry then saying, what are we to eat?
What are we to drink?
What are we to wear for clothing?
For the Gentiles eagerly seek all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things, but seek first His kingdom and His righteousness, and all these things will be provided for you.
So let's talk about what the Bible tells us about financial faithfulness,
and how to deal with a financial downturn.
When you find yourself in the valley, sometimes people find themselves in the valley because the government shuts down and they're employed by the federal government and they missed a couple of paychecks.
That's pretty tough for people.
Sometimes it happens to people because their company moves and they didn't want to move with their company.
Sometimes it's because of the tremendous cost of some sort of health challenge in their lives.
And so there are a lot of different reasons that we experience difficulties in our financial life, but there are five biblical principles that I want to give you today that are important.
If you are in my college audience, if you're in my high school, if you're my young adult audience even, these five principles are absolutely essential for you.
But if you're older, you can still get it right, okay?
You can start today to get it right.
Here's principle number one.
When it comes to your finances, dedicate it all
to God, dedicate everything you have to God.
It is all His.
He is the owner of everything.
I am a steward.
I don't own anything.
Now, I know according to my deed, I own a house.
According to the title, I own a car.
But in God's economy, here's the truth.
He owns everything.
I don't own anything.
But he has given me the privilege of stewarding or managing some resources, some possessions.
And I want to re- I want to manage those in a way that they are dedicated to his glory and to advancing his kingdom.
I dedicated all to God.
In verse 19, he says to us,
Don't store up for yourself treasures on earth where moth and rust destroy with these break in steel, but store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, dedicate everything you have to God for where your treasure is, there your heart will be.
See, wherever your treasure is, your heart will follow.
Your heart always follows it.
Some people get that backwards.
They think that treasure follows heart.
That's not what Jesus said.
Jesus said that wherever your treasure is, then your heart actually follows.
So if I say all that I have, all of my treasure, all of my earthly possessions, don't belong to me, Lord, they belong to you.
Then my heart begins to follow that.
And my supreme affection is no longer for my stuff.
It's for my savior.
My supreme affection is no longer for the things of this world.
It is for
God who has given his son to die on a cross so that I could have eternal life.
It is for God who has provided me with all of these blessings in my life.
In verse 24, Jesus says, no one can serve two masters.
Now that word is simply drawn from the ancient world where there were people who owned other people, where there were slave owners.
And he says, you can only serve one master.
And God is to be our ultimate
Master, He is the one that we are to serve.
And then Jesus comes to this salient point.
He's like, if I'm not making this plain enough to you, let me just tell you how it is.
You cannot serve God and wealth.
Some older translations use the word mammon there.
It's an old word that just means wealth, means possessions, material things.
And Jesus says, you cannot serve God and wealth.
You're going to serve somebody.
And you're either going to serve God or you're going to serve your stuff.
Let me tell you what I know.
I have learned some of these lessons in my life by living them the wrong way.
Money makes a great servant, but it is a cruel master.
If you live your life for possessions and for stuff and for material gain, I'm going to tell you there is
There is a drumbeat of more, more, more that enters our souls and it consumes us.
But wherever your treasure is, that's where your heart is going to go.
I read an interesting article about a gadget.
I would basically disagree with about a lot of stuff.
His name is Yvonne Schunard.
He is the founder of the really very popular brand Patagonia.
They make all the outdoor stuff and make hiking gear.
They make, you know, ski stuff, all that sort of stuff for the outdoors.
Well, Yvonne Schunard is committed to two things, which is interesting.
Number one, he is a deeply committed socialist.
Now, it's interesting that he built a $3 billion company on capitalism, but he's a socialist, but that's another sermon.
I'm not even going to go there, okay?
but he is also deeply committed to the environment.
So much so that he took the entire $3 billion value of Patagonia and he put it in a trust.
He still draws a salary, but all the rest of the profits and the resources of Patagonia go to saving the environment.
Now, look, I'm all for stewarding the environment, okay?
But here's what he's done.
He's made the environment his God.
And so he's devoted everything he has to the environment.
Now, while I would disagree with his cause and his method, what I would say to you is, that's actually what God calls us to do with him.
To say, God, I'm devoting everything that I am and everything that I have to you.
Lord, it is all yours.
If you're a follower of Jesus, I just want to encourage you to do something.
At some point today, tomorrow in your quiet time,
One of the things you should just do is you ought to have a prayer of dedication, maybe with your family, where you say, Lord, everything we have, our house, our cars, our clothes, the plans we have for how we're going to spend the money, it all belongs to you.
You call the shots with the money that you've given us.
I'm going to tell you that is the first step to financial freedom when the finances are low.
Number two, give the first part to God.
Give the first part to God.
He tells us to seek first the kingdom of God.
See, the first part of what you have should be given to God.
I have tried to live my life for the last few years with a single mantra.
And by the way, after the first service, I said this in the first service.
And a 70-year-old man came up to me and he said this,
He said, Bob, you've said that before.
I heard you say it 10 years ago, but I want you to know that that line changed the whole way that I looked at my finances.
Here's the truth.
Not everything that comes to me is for me.
Not everything that God pours into my life is for my consumption.
God blesses me at times.
so that I will bless others, so that I will advance his kingdom.
Now, how should I give?
Well, the Bible gives us some prescription for that.
In Proverbs chapter three, verse nine, the Bible says, honor the Lord from your wealth.
Honor the Lord from your wealth and from the first of all your produce.
So your barns will be filled with plenty and your vats will overflow with new wine.
First of all, he says, make giving a priority.
You give to God the first fruits of your labor, not the leftovers.
You give to God and you say, God, since I've dedicated it all to you, I'm going to give to you before I give to anything else.
Before I do anything else, I'm going to give you your portion.
Secondly, he says, give a proportion of your income to God.
You need to pre-determine your generosity level.
And you need to budget for that.
But let me tell you where I start.
I believe the Bible teaches the tithe.
Now the tithe is an old English word that the Bible actually clarifies exactly what it means.
You don't get to make it up, okay?
You can say, I think that's Old Testament, I'm gonna give by grace, wonderful, that's fine.
But I believe that the Bible prescribes for us a tithe.
Leviticus 27, verse 30.
Thus all the tithe of the land, the seed of the land, or the fruit of the tree, it is the Lord's.
It is holy to the Lord."
So what does that word tithe mean?
Here it is verse 32.
For every tenth part of herd or flock, whatever passes under the rod, the tenth one shall be holy to the Lord.
Tithe means tenth.
Let me explain at my house.
I have a salary.
And we take the salary and we move it one decimal point to the left.
And that's what we give to start with in our giving.
That's our starting point.
We give proportionally by giving the tithe.
I believe there is a blessing in obedience and I will guarantee you there is a blessing in generosity.
Being generous has its own set of blessings.
Jesus said,
It is more blessed to give than to receive.
Look, Christmas is coming.
Those of us who are parents, I only just want to ask you to answer for yourself a simple question.
Think back to when you were a child and you opened that prized Christmas gift that you wanted.
Maybe it was that BB gun, you know, like Ralphie in a Christmas story.
You opened that.
Now there was joy in that.
Now I want you to fast forward.
to when your child unwrapped a Christmas gift.
Which one brought you the most joy?
It's a no-brainer for me.
Watching my child open Christmas gifts brought me far more joy than the happiness that I got from getting a gift.
It really is more blessed to give than to receive.
And I would challenge anyone when you get your first job
even if it is a summer job when you're a high school student, or it's your job in college, or it's that first job right out of college, or when you get out of high school, start giving to the Lord as a priority and proportionally.
And I would also say this, give it practically.
You need to give and be generous to the kingdom work of God through His church.
There are other great ministries that do wonderful things.
I would advocate for you to give to them, absolutely.
We don't want to be selfish.
It should be hoarders here.
But what we do want to say is this, that good things are happening here.
You're being spiritually fed here.
Your children are being ministered to here.
We're reaching the nations here by going on mission.
And when that happens, you ought to support that as a follower of Jesus through your local church.
So give the first part to God.
Number three, save for the future.
Now, this is something
that I just want to talk to you about as a pastor and try to give you some pastoral wisdom.
The average American household has more debt than savings.
We, and some people have absolutely none.
You have no margin in your life whatsoever.
When Jesus said, don't store up for yourself treasures on earth.
He wasn't saying, don't be prudent and save.
The Bible advocates
for saving.
Saving is wisdom.
It is not unbelief.
Proverbs 21-20, listen to this, in the house of the wise are stores.
They've saved up choice, food and oil, but a foolish man devours all that he has.
When you live a life
of consuming absolutely everything or using everything that comes in and everything that comes in then goes out and there is no plan for saving.
The Bible draws a line between wisdom and foolishness there.
And when we do that, we set ourselves up for having no margin for error, like a government shutdown or like a health crisis.
or like a sudden change in job status.
Maybe your company moves, you get laid off or difficult times come.
You have no margin for error when you don't have any savings.
Now, saving is not necessarily exciting.
I mean, let's just be honest.
Psychologists have proven that when you spend and you buy something, you get a little dopamine rush.
But saving, you don't get that.
You really don't.
But there is a security when there might be an excitement in spending.
There is a security in savings that is important.
I read one lady's story this past week.
And it was really quite heartbreaking.
My heart went out to her.
I don't use her as an example to belittle her.
I use her as an example to say, this is the kind of pain that people experience.
Her name is LaShonda Palmer.
She's a 23 year old or a 23 year veteran.
of the TSA.
Well, TSA is a government agency.
She hadn't been paid, but she's been going to work.
Now that seemed blatantly unfair to me, but at any rate, she hadn't been paid, but she's been going to work.
But the problem is that she rents an apartment, she's a single mom, her rents due, she's overdrawn in her accounts, but there's no margin in her life.
She says, quote, I don't want to get an eviction notice.
It's not that I don't work for it because I am working for it.
I should have it.
See, those lines give a human face to the wisdom of the Bible about saving.
I would say this to any person.
I don't know what you think you can't live without, but even if it is your $5 Starbucks, could you skip that a few days a week and start saving just a little?
The Bible says,
In Proverbs 13 verse 11, dishonest money dwindles away, but he who gathers money little by little makes it grow.
You might be amazed how over the course of a year, you begin to build up a fund that could be your proverb, it could be your proverbs fund.
And when something goes wrong, you've got some money there and you're not living a marginalized life.
See, I am convinced that living a marginalized life is not walking by faith.
It is presumption.
It is poor planning on our part.
And so what we need to do is make sure that even if it is a small amount, we begin to save.
Number four, repay what you owe.
If you have debt, then as a person of integrity, as a follower of Jesus, it is an obligation that we repay what we owe.
Most of our indebtedness comes because we are impatient.
We refuse to wait.
And so plastic is fantastic.
And we go to the mall or we go wherever else it is.
And we begin to accrue high interest credit card debt.
Now, one of the things that we do in our church is we teach Dave Ramsey's curriculum on, uh, on financial freedom.
And we embrace that.
And one of the things that a lot of people don't understand is there is a difference between an expense and an investment.
See, a lot of you were not taught that in school.
I don't know why we're not teaching this in school anymore, but there is a difference between an expense and an investment.
Your house is an investment.
You may be in debt for your house, but it's going to appreciate in value
And that's something that's going to be an investment in your life.
And expense is something that you consume, either immediately like food or over a short period of time like clothing.
We need to make sure that we're not going into debt for expenses, but it's okay for an investment.
That just makes good sense.
But here's something, a principle you need to remember, Proverbs 22, verse seven.
the rich rules over the poor and the borrower becomes the lender's slave.
You see, when I find myself in debt, what I have done is I have found myself in the position of a servant to that lending company, to that credit card company.
And whatever portion of my income is, that is indentured to them, that's then enslaved to them.
Then here's what I can't do.
I can't use that to glorify God.
I can't even use that to provide for my family.
Every dollar you spend on interest is a dollar.
You cannot spend either to advance the kingdom of God and the gospel or to enjoy for your family.
That leads me to the fifth principle.
Enjoy what you have.
A lot of sermons on stewardship on financial faithfulness kind of end with the point four, but I want to end with point five because I believe it is an act of gratitude to enjoy the blessings of God.
When you dedicated all to him, when you give the first portion back to him to advance his kingdom through his church, when you begin to save prudently for times when maybe things happen that are out of your control,
And when you are on a mission to get rid of your debt, then whatever remains, enjoy it.
Enjoy the life that God has given you.
In 1 Timothy, chapter 6, the apostle Paul wrote these words, instruct those who are rich in this present world, not to be conceited or to set their hope on the uncertainty of riches, but on God dedicated all to Him.
on God who richly supplies us with all things to enjoy.
Now, that's a biblical principle.
There is absolutely nothing wrong with the enjoyment that comes from being able to provide for our families.
It's Christmas time.
Go shopping.
Now, make sure you get the first four points in order.
Don't go into debt to do it.
But go shopping.
Buy gifts.
Some of you are blessed to have a place in Colorado.
Go skiing.
Or you're going to rent a place in Colorado.
Go skiing at Christmas.
It's great.
It's fantastic.
Enjoy the blessings of God.
Enjoy what He's given.
It is an act of gratitude.
This past summer, we got to go to the beach, my favorite place.
One morning, I just went out, I did a little run, and I was standing there at the beach.
And I just spent a moment, and I said, God, thank you.
Thank you to get to be in this beautiful place.
Thank you that I get to enjoy.
Thank you for blessing me.
It's an act of worship to enjoy the blessings of God.
Granger Smith was a country music singer, by the way, started picking guitar and singing when he was a student at Texas A&M University.
And he was kind of Texas country for a while, and then he went to Nashville and he had a recording contract.
But in 2019, he had a horrible tragedy in his life.
He and his wife lost a three-year-old son in a drowning accident.
It was horrible, obviously.
For the next four years, Granger said he really struggled.
And finally, in 2023, he just decided that country music was no longer where he needed to be.
As a matter of fact,
stopped touring, canceled all his future tour dates that I'm not recording another album, left Nashville and enrolled in seminary.
And now he is a pastor.
He's a pastor serving God, and he doesn't make the kind of money that he made singing country music.
But he said this in an interview, I had everything people chase.
I thought that was an incredible experience.
I had everything that people chase, what we're pursuing, and I was still empty.
Now I drive my kids to school, I'm on the yard, I study God's Word, and I've never had more peace.
Enjoy what you've been given.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, which is not false.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWF.org.
We'll see you next week.